1.0 Introduction
The Trans-Atlantic slave trade brought the economies of Europe and West Africa into greater contact than ever before. Through the framework of Marxist interpretations of class structure and economic activity, we can see that the Trans-Atlantic slave trade acted as a driving force in an economic revolution within Ghana, creating a new Bourgeoisie class that was removed from traditional methods of agriculture. For the first time ever, there existed an economic class of Ghanains who lived purely off the labor of others. Ama Ata Aidoo's play Anowa gives us a window into the world of this new Bourgeoisie class. Aidoo discusses their relationships with those that they enslave as well as their attempts to place themselves within the larger class community and look for belonging in a changing economic reality.


This paper will look at the effects of the slave trade on the people of Ghana through the framework of a Marxist vocabulary. I hope to center the narrative on the changes to the economic life of everyday people by analyzing the impact of a new and revolutionary economic modality that arose out of the slave trade.

1.1 Thesis
The Trans Atlantic slave trade brought the necessary economic situation to Ghana to create a protocapitalist economy Where, for the first time, a small group of people were able to effectively control the economic output of a much larger group.

2.0 Pre-Capitalist Ghana and response to introduction of Capitalist tendencies

The limited economic exchange present before the beginning of the slave trade consisted mainly of textile imports from Europe and gold exports from Ghana. This trade economy was not a significant driver in a Ghanaian society that relied primarily on sustenance agriculture. The entire population of Ghana was involved in subsistence agricultural practices.
"a large part of the economy was characterized by a household subsistence form of economic organization with a low degree of specialization and exchange, and a low level of material production. Each household was to a large degree an independent center for production and consumption carrying on a wide range of agricultural, service, and manufacturing activities." (Hymer Page 36)
Unlike Europe, the capacity to produce a surplus existed but was not exploited. The Ghanains had the necessary agricultural technology to support higher population concentrations, but the egalitarian structure to land ownership prevented the exploitation of a working class (Proletariat) (H. G. Jones The Earth Goddess, as cited in Economic Forms of Pre-Colonial Ghana Page 34 (3)). While Europe endured brutal feudal systems that irked out every possible surplus value from the labor of the Proletariat, Ghanains enjoyed a comparatively better quality of life.

The increase in trade with European powers, as well as creation of the Transatlantic slave trade put new pressures on the Ghanaian economy to develop more specialization and stratification. The slave trade created an economic incentive that allowed merchants to more successfully specialize and to appropriate the surplus labor of their slaves. As the expanding Bourgeoisie gained more economic power and political influence, the role of the state as a guarantor of security and as a source of slaves became paramount.

3.0 Anowa
Ama Atu Aidoo's Anowa presents a modern retelling of an archetypal morality play. The traditional story tells of a disobedient daughter who rejects her parents and marries an attractive stranger, only for him to be revealed as the devil in disguise. Aidoo adapts this narrative by substituting an abstract devil in disguise with Kofi, a very real man who becomes caught up in the slave trade and becomes part of the new Bourgeoisie class in Ghana. The symbolism of Kofi emerges more fully when put into the context of the traditional folklore. Kofi is an embodiment of the devil. Aidoo's criticism of the slave trade is obvious from the start, but instead of focusing her judgment and anger on the European Slave traders, she chooses a Ghanaian man to embody the evil of slavery. This choice is intentional and adds nuance to an otherwise two sided exchange. The evil of slavery is not only in the European creation of the trade, but also in Ghanaian participation.

The slave trade is creating a new Bourgeoisie class of Ghanaian merchants who do not work. One of Anowa's chief complaints is that her and her husband no longer participate in meaningful farm work. Anowa is realizing that Kofi's place in the economic order is becoming something not seen before in Ghana. Kofi creates a new Bourgeoisie class that does not provide self sufficiency for itself. Even the kings household was traditionally self sufficient (Hymer, 39). This relation that Anowa has with labor echos Marx's writing on the value of productivity. Marx argues that people gain meaning, even the essence of their life, from productivity (Fromm CH4.2). Anowa's new lack of productivity in a social class of idleness eats away at her spirit. Anowa's barrenness is seen as a direct result of her husbands ownership of slaves and is representative of Aidoo's criticism of the vacuity of life as a slave owner. Aidoo, through Kofi and Anowa, argues that a life of luxury provided by the uncompensated labor of slaves is not worth living. While Marx argues for the disassembly of the bourgeois class, Aidoo goes one step further and posits that such a life is not worth living at all. This is evident when both Kofi and Anowa commit suicide at the end of the play. It is the weight of living idly off the labor of exploited workers that pushes both of them to suicide. In Kofi's last moments on stage, he is horrified by the peeping eyes of his slaves all around him. He sees them for humans for the first time and suddenly the reality of his economic success is revealed to him.

4.0 Conclusion
Although Europe and Ghana did not share the same pre-capitalist economic origins, they shared many of the same proto-capitalist economic features. Both regions saw a huge increase in a property owning class, deriving their wealth from the ownership of the labor of a Proletariat class. The economic revolution brought by the transatlantic slave trade forever altered the makeup of Ghanaian society. The traditional egalitarian land and labor practices were destroyed by the greed of the new Bourgeoisie. The weakening effect of this economic revolution on traditional political powers and the subsequent economic crash with the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade laid the foundation for future exploitation of Ghanaian labor by British imperialism. The relationship between the Gold Coast and the British colonial power closely mirrors that of Bourgeoisie and Proletariat. In this way, the entire nation of Ghana was made into a Proletariat state by the effects of the slave trade. The intractable imprints of class hierarchy in a capitalist economy still affect inter- and intra- African relationships.
